**MODULE 8.**

**MAN OVERBOARD (MOB) AND SEA BOAT LAUNCH AND RECOVERY**

**Aim:**

To cover - Initial response by any person in the event of a Man
Overboard situation.

    - Duties of a crew member carrying out MOB and Aft Lookout watch.

- Sea boat and layout.

    - Launch and recovery of sea boat.

    - Sea boat launch and recovery orders and action.

    - Painter, painter pennant and boat rope layout.

    - Sea Boat launch in a seaway – some factors to be consider.

**Overview:**

The sea boat is a very important piece of ship’s equipment. In addition
to its possible role in MOB situations it can be used in many other
tasks i.e. mooring lines, transfer of personnel etc. Therefore crew must
be capable of safely and efficiently launching and recovering the boat.
Practice through drills, and information in this module will assist crew
members to gain proficiency.

**Assessment:**

Oral and practical examination by a Mate and/or Watchleader who will,
when satisfied, sign off the relevant parts in crew member’s ‘Diary of
Service and Experience Log’ book.

**Outcome:**

For crew to be able to carry out MOB and Aft Lookout watch and assemble
to safely launch the sea boat with the James Craig underway at up to 8
knots.

**INITIAL RESPONSE TO MAN OVERBOARD (MOB)**

Any member of the ship’s company, on seeing a person fall overboard,
calls out “Man Overboard” indicating side e.g. Port or Starboard, and
throws overboard any object that can float, life ring, life jacket etc.
Maintain visual contact and point at the person in the water until
relieved.

The Ship’s Master will decide to order the launch of the Sea Boat. Page
14 deals with some of the factors he will have to contend with.

**CREW ON STERN LOOKOUT WATCH (MOB WATCH)**

Duties - Man position adjacent to Dan Buoy on the port side of the
quarter deck.

-  Wear a safety harness.

-  Inspect Dan Buoy, Life Ring and Marker Buoy to ensure they are not
   damaged or tangled, and are connected together, and free to launch
   quickly.

-  Report any problems to the Watch Officer or Quarter Deck Watchleader.

-  Carry out duties listed below.

-  Maintain a lookout in **ALL** directions vis. Fore, Aft, Port,
   Starboard as well as monitoring activity on board. Report to the
   Officer of the Watch any unusual observations.

. On hearing the alarm or observing a person falling overboard, launch
the Dan Buoy, life ring and smoke/light marker.

. Point at the person in the water until relieved.

.When relieved, climb the Mizzen Shrouds and re-establish visual contact
with the person in the water and point.

. Signal the direction to the person in the water to the sea boat crew.
Be aware that the Dan Buoy may not be near the person in the water.

. Remain in the shrouds until the sea boat has returned and is safely
stowed on the ship or when relieved.

**SEA BOAT**

The Sea Boat is a semi rigid inflatable boat manned by a Coxswain and
one Crew. The Coxswain is in command of the Sea Boat and with Crew
member must be conversant with the contents of this Module and Module 12
for Small Boat Handling - Sea Boat.

Launch and recovery is carried out by a team consisting of a crew of 8.
Each team member’s duties are listed on their crew card. The remainder
of the ship’s crew act as ordered. They may be also required to assist
in recovery.

#. .. rubric:: Sea Boat layout
      :name: sea-boat-layout

   .. rubric:: Preparation and operation of the Sea Boat – refer Module
      12. For the position of Boat Rope, Painter and Painter Pendent
      refer to separate diagrams on pages 8, 9 and 10.
      :name: preparation-and-operation-of-the-sea-boat-refer-module-12.-for-the-position-of-boat-rope-painter-and-painter-pendent-refer-to-separate-diagrams-on-pages-8-9-and-10.

View of Ship’s Port side. (Boat stowed)

View from the Port side.

Plan View. (Boat Stowed)

NOTE. (Also refer attached diagram.)

**Painter** ( This is the main line used to tow the Sea Boat when it is
working alongside the ship)leads forward and is secured to a metal pin
forward of the foremast shrouds.

The painter has two positions marked;

1. Long mark (Ladder mark – long canvas strip on the painter), when used
       this will position the sea boat under the boarding ladder.

..

    It also allows the sea boat to be hoisted and stowed in its cradle.

    2. Short mark (Davit mark – short canvas strip on the painter), this
    will position the sea boat under the davit fall.

For launch, the painter must be on the long mark and moved to the short
mark as soon as the boat is swung out. The reverse applies when
recovering the sea boat.

The marks on the painter are set at the pin.

    On the aft end of the painter is a steel ring into which the Sea
    Boat’s painter is clipped.

    **Painter pendent** is spliced into the painter. The painter pendent
    is controlled from a position forward of the main shrouds. This line
    is used to control the movement of the sea boat when it is being
    launched, alongside the ship and being recovered.

The bow of the sea boat is controlled at all times by the painter
pendent either from the deck or on the rail. A chafe patch on the
shroud/sheer pole can be used to take strain.

    **Bowsing lines.** To control the stern of the sea boat during
    launch and recovery two bowsing lines are used. One leads aft and
    the other forward. They are spliced together at a hook that in turn
    is attached by Snap Hook to the stern sling ring on the starboard
    side of the sea boat transom.

**Aft Bowsing** line is coiled and stowed on the aft side of the boat
skid.

**Fore Bowsing** line is coiled and stowed on the ladder leading to the
boat skids.

    Both lines are worked together to control the stern of the Sea Boat,
    refer to the next section.

**LAUNCH AND RECOVERY OF THE SEA BOAT**

**Launch/Recovery Team and Duties**.

Refer to next section for associated orders & action.

**Launch:**

1. Officer/Watchleader.

..

    Control of the launch and recovery operations.

    Ensure all crew are at their stations before commencing launch.

    Release Pelican clips that retain gripes.

    Attach Sea Boat painter, using the snap shackle, to the painter
    ring. (Ensure line is outboard of course sheets).

    Release bowsing lines from the Sea Boat, after crew are aboard.

    Attach the bowsing lines to the Sea Boat on recovery (before crew
    disembark.

    Supervise lowering and recovery.

2. Davit After Guy Hand.

..

    Use guy to control the movement of the davit.

    Guy has a set mark to maximum travel for launch. Approx 45 degrees.

    Control rate of swing particularly when the ship is rolling in a
    seaway.

    When Davit is in position and Guy secure, assist on the fall.

Use guy to swing davit inboard during boat recovery.

Tension and secure on completion of operation.

3. Aft Bowsing Line Hand. (Wear climbing harness)

..

    Attach climbing harness to strong point if it becomes necessary to
    go up to the Sea Boat platform.

Clear gripes from sea boat.

Return to the deck and lead the aft bowsing line outboard of the aft
davit onto the quarter deck to control the stern of the sea boat. It may
be necessary to take a turn around the davit.

    Use bowsing line to swing boat and control its movement outboard
    when launching.

    Be alert for excessive swing if the ship is rolling and keep the
    line taut.

When recovering the sea boat take the bowsing line off the davit and
lead inboard to control the sea boat swing during recovery. Work with
the forward bowsing line hand to control and position the sea boat over
its cradle.

Pass gripes over the sea boat to secure it in the cradle.

4. Forward Bowsing Line Hand. Refer to Davit Fall Team.

During launch make sure the forward bowsing line is clear to run.

During recovery, work with the Aft Bowsing Line hand to swing the sea
boat around and guide it over the cradle by hauling forward.

    5. Painter Pendent Hand. (Wear climbing harness)

Painter Pendent is spliced to the Painter and used to control Painter
end,

during the launch and recovery to control the sea boat’s swing.

On launch keep tension on painter pennant to assist swing-out of davit.

Ease as boat is lowered and prevent bow dropping.

    Have painter ready for return of the sea boat and once attached
    control position of the sea boat while it is alongside the ship.

    6. Davit Fore Guy and Painter Hand.

    Davit Fore Guy.

    Haul davit outboard on launch (amount of travel is controlled by aft
    guy). Make fast and proceed to adjust painter.

    When boat is being recovered adjust painter, return to fore davit
    guy and ease to allow davit to swing inboard.

Painter. (Also refer to notes following for layout diagram)

This line leads from forward of the fore mast shroud and has Painter
Pennant spliced into it.

Painter has two fixed positions.

1. Maximum length, long mark (Ladder mark) for swing out and in, and, if
   required, to allow emergency boat to fall back to boarding ladder.

2. Shorten to short mark (Davit mark) for fixing the position of the
   boat under the davit, when it is being lowered into the water and
   recovered.

7.& 8. Davit Fall Team.

    Made up of two hands during lowering and recovery. Other spare hands
    can assist with recovery.

Launch;

Secure the freeing port.

    One hand gathers in main course sheet and secures to davit cleat
    using strop.

    Alternatively -

    Depending on the ship’s course and the position of the main sail and
    yard it may be necessary to use the block and line seized to the
    port mizzen topmast guy to brail up the main sail port sheet and
    yard brace clear of the davit.

Second hand takes fall from pin and leads it down the deck.

Two hands heave boat from cradle and take a turn around the pin.

Once outboard, the boat is lowered to top rail.

    When crew are on board, the boat is lowered to the water with plenty
    of slack in the fall. This will prevent the boat from being
    “plucked” unexpectedly from the water as the ship rolls and help
    crew to cast off the fall from the boat sling.

After boat is away haul in the fall and secure to topgallant rail.

When the boat is successfully launched assist rigging the boarding

ladder.

**Recovery:**

    When the sea boat returns the painter pendent hand lowers the
    painter ring to the sea boat. They connect using the snap hook.

    When boat is in position under the davit lower fall. The crew attach
    it to the boat sling.

With fall off the pin, call crew to assist haul in fall to bring boat to
the topgallant rail.

At the topgallant rail attach the bowsing lines.

    After crew have disembarked, painter on the long or ladder mark,
    haul the sea boat to the cradle height. Pass fall around the pin.

    Aft Bowsing line hand moves inboard and works with the Fore Bowsing
    line hand to control the swing of the sea boat and guide it over the
    cradle.

    With davit inboard, lower the boat to rest in the cradle. Guide by
    using the sea boat’s painter and the forward bowsing line.

Secure gripes.

Lookout leaves the mizzen shrouds when all is secure.

Coil and stow fall.

Recover and stow boarding ladder.

Check that sea boat is ready for next launch.

#. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section

   .. rubric:: ORDER AND *ACTION*;
      :name: order-and-action

**LAUNCH**

**Order** & *Action required.*

“Stations for Launching the Sea boat “
                                      

*Launch and boat crew assemble at their stations*

**“Away the Sea Boat”**

    *Brail Mainsail sheet to davit cleat. It may be necessary to take in
    the mainsail &/or brace the main yards prior to turning out the Sea
    Boat.*

    *Painter to be on the long mark*

    *Connect the painter/painter pendent ring to sea boat bridle snap
    shackle- Watchleader..*

    *Man davit forward guy – 1 crew*

    *Man painter pendent – 1 crew*

    *Man davit after guy - 1 crew*

    *Man the aft bowsing line - 1 crew*

    *Man the fore bowsing line – one of the crew from the falls team.
    Loose to run.*

Man the falls – Palm Down turns for hauling – 2 crew
                                                    

    *Off gripes – Watchleader*

    *Fore bowsing line cleared to run.*

*Coxswain dressed and engine cleared away*

*Crewman dressed and radio checked*

*Check boat rope rigged just above plimsol line*

**“Hoist to the Davit”**

*Haul away on fall.*

Haul taut painter pendent to control the swing of the sea boat
                                                              

    *Haul taut the sea boat aft bowsing line*

    *Let the fore bowsing line run*

*Haul taut after davit guy*

#. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section-1

   .. rubric:: “Well”
      :name: well

*Avast hauling on fall.*

*One turn on the fall pin.*

*Haul taut painter pendent*

*Haul taut the aft bowsing line*

**“Turn out the Davit”**

    *Haul away davit forward guy*

    *Ease davit after guy let it run (under control) to the stopper*

    *Haul painter pendent to control sea boat’s bow and assist in the
    turnout*

    *Haul aft bowsing line to prevent swing and assist in turnout.*

    *Be prepared to work (ease and haul) the aft bowsing line as
    required.*

3. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section-2

   .. rubric:: “Well”
      :name: well-1

..

    *Make fast davit forward guy*

*Haul painter - Make fast on pin at "Short" mark*

*Turn up davit after guy*

5. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section-3

   .. rubric:: “Lower to the Rail”
      :name: lower-to-the-rail

..

    *Painter on the short mark*

    *Ease away fall on the pin*

    *Boat lowered to the topgallant rail*

**“Well”**

*Avast easing on fall*

*Turns on the fall*

*Coxswain and Crew embark*

*Coxswain tilts the engine down so that it is ready to start*

*Release boat bowsing lines*

*Coxswain and crew take hold of the manrope.*

**Check with officer of the watch that it is clear to continue, and
lower the boat.**

**If clear continue.**

**“Lower Away”**

*Sea Boat Coxswain may release the Safety chain snap hook.*

*Sea boat crew hold onto the manrope*

*Ease away fall (on the pin)*

    *Use painter pennant to control sea boat bow*

    *Boat lands in water*

    *Weight taken by painter/painter pendent*

    *Cast off fall from pin - no weight*

    *Overhaul fall to provide slack to unhook*

    *Coxswain release lifting hook (Snap shackle)*

    *Haul back fall*

    *Start Engine - go ahead slow if ship has headway*

    *Boat now towed by ship on painter.*

7. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section-4

   .. rubric:: “Slip”
      :name: slip

*Coxswain has command of the sea boat*

    *Crew releases snap shackle by slip line*

    *Coxswain drives boat ahead and out from ship*

    *Crew watches MOB Lookout on ship*

Crew checks radio contact
                         

*Coxswain drives boat under crew direction to MOB or head off on task.*

**“Clear Away for Boat Recovery”**

*Deploy pilot ladder*

*Clear away lines*

*Prepare falls*

*Lower painter and towing ring just clear of water for the sea boat*

*Have falls ready to be lowered to sea boat when called for by coxswain*

*Check boat rope rigged just above plimsol line*

**RECOVER**

**Order** & *Action required.*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**“Stations for Recovering the Sea boat”**

*Recovery crew assemble at their stations*

*Ensure mainsail sheet still brailed to davit cleat*

    *Check painter & painter pendent are outboard of Mainsail sheet*

Lower fall to the water
                       

    *Turn up painter at the short mark*

    *Ensure davit turned out to the stopper on the aft davit guy*

    *Check the pilot ladder*

**“Stand by to receive the Sea boat”**

*Man the fall - take in hand Fall Team and general crew*

*Man painter pendent*

*Man both bowsing Lines - take in hand*

*Man davit forward guy - remains on pin*

*Man after davit guy - remains secured*

*If required, man the painter.* *It should be on the short mark.*

**“Sea boat "Come In"” (Arm Signal + Voice)**

    *Coxswain drives to painter/painter pendent*

Crew connects Sea Boat painter by snap hook to the ship’s painter ring.
                                                                       

*Coxswain drops speed - painter takes tow*

**“Ease Painter to the Ladder” (If requested)**

    *Painter eased away on pin to 'Long' mark*

Additional control provided by painter pendent
                                              

    *Hold painter on pin to 'Long' mark with three turns*

9. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section-5

   .. rubric:: “Well”
      :name: well-2

*Confirm boat is alongside ladder*

*Unload heavy items by heaving line or davit hoist*

*Boat Crew may disembark via the pilot ladder*

**“Standby to Hoist”**

*Painter hauled in to “Short” mark. Coxswain uses engine to assist.*

*Painter pennant assists and stands by to control sea boat when it
leaves the*

*water.*

    *Coxswain calls for lifting hook (falls) to be lowered*

    *Coxswain connects lifting hook. Use both snap shackle and snap
    hook.*

    *Coxswain stops & stows engine, crew holds lifting hook tail*

***Do not** haul out the slack on the fall until instructed by the
Coxswain.*

**“Hoist to the Topgallant Rail”**

Fall hauled/run in by Fall Crew assisted by general crew
                                                        

**“Well”**

*Avast hauling on fall (sea boat at ships rail)*

    *Hold fall - in hand*

*Coxswain connect boat bowsing lines*

*Coxswain and crew disembark*

**“Hoist to the Davit”**

*Painter set on the “Long” mark*

*Falls walked in slow for Sea Boat to clear cradle*

*Use painter pendent and fore and aft bowsing lines to steady Sea Boat*

**“Well, Turn in the Davit”**

    *Avast hauling on fall*

    *Haul on davit after guy*

    *Ease away davit fore guy*

    *Ease away painter pendent*

    *Haul in the fore bowsing line while easing the aft bowsing line.*

*Swing boat in by hand - to boat cradle*

**“Lower to the Cradle”**

*Ease away handsomely on fall*

*Guide boat to the cradle using the aft bowsing line and boat bridal*

*Land Sea boat into the cradle*

**“Secure the Sea boat”**

*On gripes*

    *Haul taut and make fast davit after guy*

    *Haul taut and make fast davit forward guy*

    *Release the painter and hang it on davit cleat*

    *Release the mainsail sheet*

    *Haul taut on the fall and make fast*

    *Tidy lines and return all gear*

    *Return painter to the long mark & set painter pendent.*

    *Secure fore and aft bowsing lines*

**Advise officer of the watch that sea boat is secure.**

**MOB Lookout returns to the deck.**

**Painter, Painter pendent and Boat rope;** Controlling Sea Boat Pennant
during launch, recovery & manoeuvring. Ref. Main notes.

    Sea Boat – Stowed and rigged ready to launch. Painter on “Long Mark”
    with aft end secured to davit pin.

**Launch:**

Sea Boat – Ready to be turned out. Painter is on “Long Mark” to give
enough slack for connection to sea boat bridle.

Sea Boat – Turned out & lowered to the rail, ready to be lowered to the
water. Painter is now hauled to “Short Mark”.

    Sea Boat – In the water with Painter on the “Short Mark”.

    Sea Boat – Returns for recovery – Painter on the “Short Mark” & held
    out by Painter Pendent Hand for pickup by boat crew.

**Recovery:** pennant control is the reverse of launch. Once Sea Boat is
at the rail & crew disembarked, Painter is returned to “Long Mark”.

**Boarding Ladder:** To allow the sea boat to fall back to the Boarding
Ladder, ease the Painter to the “Long Mark”.

**SEA BOAT LAUNCH IN A SEAWAY – SOME FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED.**

Crew need to have a perspective on some of factors to be considered by
the Master before committing to launch the sea boat, thus gain an
understand of what could be a complex operation.

First Mate and Watchleader must be fully briefed on action to be taken.

In sheltered waters the following also applies however more so in the
open sea.

1. Course being steered;

..

    ● Is the ship running free, on a broad reach, close reach, beam
    reach, close

    hauled?

    ● Starboard tack or port tack?

2. Sea state – swell direction and size.

3. Strength of the wind and trend.

4. Launch on the lee side or weather side.

5. Sails set and action;

..

    ● Rapid sail reduction

    ● Reduce sails

    ● Box yards to heave too.

    ● Reduce sails and heave too

    ● Rapid sail reduction and go to power

6. Position of rigging that may affect smooth launch. i.e. braces and
   sheets of the mainsail.

7. Recover under power only

..

    8. Time of the day/night

    9. Experience of the boat crew and launch crew.

The Master is faced with many decisions prior to committing the sea boat
and at worst in a MOB situation from having one crew in the water to
placing a further two in jeopardy.

Each of the points above have sub considerations with decisions to be
made. Some are those following. Can you think of others and more
importantly solutions.

1. Course being steered. –

   a. To launch on the weather side exposes the sea boat to the direct
      force of the weather and sea. It will be driven against the ship’s
      hull.

   b. To launch on the lee side offers protection of the ship to the sea
      boat during launch and later recovery.

   c. If the ship is on a Starboard tack the sea boat will be in a lee

2. Sea state. –

   d. Size and frequency of the swell.

   e. Wave height.

..

    Special care will be required by the launch and recovery team to
    compensate for these factors. Sea Boat Coxswain will have to be
    particularly careful when slipping from and reattaching the fall.

3. Strength of the wind and trend.

   f. Has it been building in strength

   g. Is it dropping off?

4. To launch on the weather or lee side.

   h. If the ship is on a starboard tack it may be safe to launch as the
      sea boat is on the lee side as the ships hull provides some
      protection.

   i. If on a port tack the launch is exposed to the weather so it may
      be wise to defer the launch until the ship has come about.
      Critical recovery time will be lost.

5. Sail set and action.

   j. Stop the ship by boxing the yards?

..

    Starboard tack – box the main yards. This will require port mainsail
    braces and sheets to be brailed up clear of the davit.

    Port tack – box by bracing the main yards. Again main sail braces
    and sheets will need to be cleared.

    Raise tack and sheets on the mainsail will reduce the problem.

k. Reduce sails to trim for boxing or heaving too.

l. Rapid sail reduction to take in all sails and proceed under power.

m. The taking in of all sails in a seaway will remove their stabilising
   effect and the ship will roll more thus further complicating the sea
   boat launch.

6. Position of rigging that may affect smooth launch. i.e. braces and
   sheets of the mainsail.

..

    Special block and lanyard has been mounted on the port mizzen stay
    to brail up main sail’s port brace.

7. Recovery under power.

   n. Once all sails are secure proceed with Williamson turn or enter
      search patters.

   o. Manoeuvre to safer position to launch the sea boat.

8. Time of the day/night and visibility. Is there sufficient daylight to
   complete the operation?

9. Experience of the boat crew and the suitability of the sea boat to
       handle the prevailing conditions.

For additional factors to be taken into account by the Sea Boat Coxswain
and crew when leaving and returning to the ship at sea when the ship is
moving under the influence of the prevailing wind, swell and general sea
state. Refer to Module 12.
