*************************
The Sydney Heritage Fleet
*************************

The Lady Hopetoun and Port Jackson Marine Steam Museum, the forerunner
of the Sydney Heritage Fleet, was founded in 1965 by a group of
public-spirited individuals to preserve Sydney's 1902 VIP steam launch
*Lady Hopetoun*. The organisation later became known as the Sydney
Maritime Museum Limited. In 1998 the museum adopted the trading name
Sydney Heritage Fleet and later, Australian Heritage Fleet. In 2004 the
Museum reverted to Sydney Heritage Fleet. The Fleet now comprises 8
operating historical vessels, which is amongst the largest such
collection in Australia.

A community-based non-profit organisation, the Fleet's mission is to
*build and maintain an internationally recognised centre of excellence
in maritime heritage for the benefit of all Australians by presenting
through research, acquisition, conservation, restoration, education
and operation, our continuing maritime history.* The Fleet is funded
through donations, membership subscriptions, income from vessel charters
and tours and the proceeds of Art Unions.

The Fleet's 1000+ membership, including over 650 dedicated volunteer
workers, restore, operate and maintain the fleet of vintage vessels. In
the process they preserve traditional technical methods and skills.

The Fleet's oldest vessel, the 1874 iron barque *James Craig*, has
been fully restored and regularly puts to sea under full sail. The Fleet
also operates three of the most historically significant vessels on
Sydney Harbour: the 1902 steam tug *Waratah*, the 1902 VIP steam launch
*Lady Hopetoun* and the 1903 schooner *Boomerang*.

Other operational vessels include: Protex, the 1908 inner-harbour motor
launch; *Harman*, the 1947 ex-RAN harbour workboat/passenger motor boat;
*Berrima*, the 1954

Botany Bay general workboat/passenger motor boat; *Kookaburra II*, the
1954 wooden speed boat.

Under restoration are the 1912 ferry *Kanangra*, and the 1927 coastal
steam tender *John Oxley*.

The Fleet also has 55 small heritage boats and one of the largest
collections of marine engines in Australia, which are being restored and
conserved. The Fleet's collection includes more than fifty model ships,
including models of some of the Fleet's own vessels.

The Fleet maintains a comprehensive research library/archive, which
includes photographs, ships' plans, diaries, logs and journals.

The Sydney Heritage Fleet made significant contributions towards the
establishment of the Australian National Maritime Museum, which opened
at Darling Harbour in 1991. Whilst the two organisations differ, they do
play complementary roles, the Sydney Heritage Fleet placing an emphasis
on preservation, restoration and operation of heritage vessels.
