**************
MEET THE FLEET
**************

**Aim:**

Introduce new crew to the Sydney Heritage Fleet and James Craig.

**Overview:**

The Sydney Heritage Fleet

Brief description of James Craig

Requirements to become a crew member in James Craig

Outline of crew training programme

Training syllabus

Crew obligation to participate in maintenance

Crew ranking system

Ship’s layout

Ship’s facts and figures

**Outcome:**

Crew will gain an appreciation of the Sydney Heritage Fleet’s operation
and a foundation for becoming a crew member in James Craig.

*********************
Sydney Heritage Fleet
*********************

The Lady Hopetoun and Port Jackson Marine Steam Museum, the forerunner
of the Sydney Heritage Fleet, was founded in 1965 by a group of
public-spirited individuals to preserve Sydney's 1902 VIP steam launch
*Lady Hopetoun.* The organisation later became known as the Sydney
Maritime Museum Limited. In 1998 the museum adopted the trading name
Sydney Heritage Fleet and later, Australian Heritage Fleet. In 2004 the
Museum reverted to Sydney Heritage Fleet. The Fleet now comprises 8
operating historical vessels, which is amongst the largest such
collection in Australia.

A community-based non-profit organisation, the Fleet's mission is to
*build and* *maintain an internationally recognised centre of excellence
in maritime heritage for* *the benefit of all Australians by presenting
through research, acquisition,* *conservation, restoration, education
and operation, our continuing maritime history.* The Fleet is funded
through donations, membership subscriptions, income from vessel charters
and tours and the proceeds of Art Unions.

The Fleet's 1000+ membership, including over 650 dedicated volunteer
workers, restore, operate and maintain the fleet of vintage vessels. In
the process they preserve traditional technical methods and skills.

The Fleet's oldest vessel, the 1874 iron barque James Craig\ *,* has
been fully restored and regularly puts to sea under full sail. The Fleet
also operates three of the most historically significant vessels on
Sydney Harbour: the 1902 steam tug Waratah, the 1902 VIP steam launch
Lady Hopetoun and the 1903 schooner Boomerang\ *.*

Other operational vessels include: Protex, the 1908 inner-harbour motor
launch; Harman, the 1947 ex-RAN harbour workboat/passenger motor boat;
Berrima\ *,* the 1954

Botany Bay general workboat/passenger motor boat; Kookaburra II, the
1954 wooden speed boat.

Under restoration are the 1912 ferry Kanangra, and the 1927 coastal
steam tender John Oxley.

The Fleet also has 55 small heritage boats and one of the largest
collections of marine engines in Australia, which are being restored and
conserved. The Fleet's collection includes more than fifty model ships,
including models of some of the Fleet's own vessels.

The Fleet maintains a comprehensive research library/archive, which
includes photographs, ships' plans, diaries, logs and journals.

The Sydney Heritage Fleet made significant contributions towards the
establishment of the Australian National Maritime Museum, which opened
at Darling Harbour in 1991. Whilst the two organisations differ, they do
play complementary roles, the Sydney Heritage Fleet placing an emphasis
on preservation, restoration and operation of heritage vessels.

**DESCRIPTION OF JAMES CRAIG**

James Craig is a three masted Barque of approximately 1500 tonnes
displacement with an overall length of 70 metres.

The ship and others of the era were designed to carry cargo quickly and
safely around the world. They are principally ‘down wind’ ships with
limited ability to point high into the wind.

During your training you will gain an understanding and appreciation of
how the ships were operated and handled to achieve the operators’ goals.

Refer to page 5 for the ship’s layout.

Refer to page 6 for some of the ship’s facts and figures.

**REQUIREMENTS TO JOIN THE CREW**

    Join the Sydney Heritage fleet. Membership entitles crew to access
    all the numerous activities and benefits of the fleet.

    Attend a Fleet Discovery Day to gain a broad appreciation of the
    Fleets activities.

    Minimum age 16

Complete the James Craig crew application form.

Have your Doctor complete the Sydney Heritage Fleet Medical Assessment
form. If you are the holder of a current Australian Maritime Safety
Authority (AMSA) medical, this is acceptable.

    Complete the training kit order form. The Kit you purchase covers a
    hard copy of this Handbook, A Diary of Service and Experience Log
    Book, Access to online units, Day Sail, materials and administration
    of the course.

Complete Online introduction units then;

    Attend alongside practical training course aboard James Craig
    followed by a

    mentored day as sea as a crew member.

Participate in ship maintenance.

On satisfactorily completing all introduction modules (1 to 11) and a
day sail, new crew will be placed on the ship’s crew list. They will
then be able to put their name down for crew duties as a ‘Deck Trainee’
on sailing days, harbour sails etc.

If you have an e-mail address, and you wish, you will be forwarded
communications on coming sailings and events. The alternative is to
contact the ship’s Crew Coordinator via
`*jccrew@shf.org.au* <mailto:jccrew@shf.org.au>`__ ..

You can undertake further crew training and have your efforts signed off
in your ‘Diary of Service and Experience Log’ book to progress through
the ranks.

The James Craig is a commercial vessel. Therefore, you are required to
eventually complete the NSW Maritime General Purpose Hand course.

This course is conducted by TAFE or OTEN. When there is a sufficient
number of members’ wishing to do the course the Fleet may be able to
arrange for OTEN to conduct the course in-house. The alternative is to
approach these organizations direct.

**TRAINING PROGRAMME**

Sailing the James Craig is a practical skill developed by participation.
The contents of this manual are designed to provide support to assist
crew understand and improve their skill.

To encourage and acknowledge skill levels reached in the crew, a system
of ranks has been developed. Refer to diagram on page 4.

To become eligible for progression in rank to Deck Hand, Efficient Deck
Hand, tasks set out in the ‘Diary of Service and Experience Log’ book
must be completed and signed off by an appropriate crew member or
officer.

Copies of the ‘Diary of Service and Experience Log’ book are available
from the Training Coordinator.

**TRAINING SYLLABUS**

Modules 1 to 11 plus a day at sea are designed to introduce new crew to
the James Craig.

These, plus additional modules containing more specialised information
on a variety of topics relating to the ship, can be used by all to
improve their knowledge.

The modules are continually being reviewed to comply with changes in
procedures, therefore they have been dated. To enable you to check for
changes, a copy of current Modules can be referred to in the ship’s copy
of the James Craig Crew Handbook, which is kept on board the ship.

**MAINTENANCE**

The James Craig is a working ship and therefore requires constant
routine maintenance.

All crew members are expected to participate.

Maintenance groups meet mainly at weekends with others doing work during
the week. The ship’s manager, with volunteer co-ordinators, organise the
roster and tasks.

Participation is also a good opportunity to learn more about your ship
and meet other members of the crew.

**JAMES CRAIG TRAINING PROCESS AND RANKS**

**JAMES CRAIG LAYOUT**

This map will assist you find your way around the ship.

|image0|

**Main and Anchor Decks**

|image1|

Stations; 1. Galley 2. Head 3. Windlass and Bell 4. Capstan 5. Deckhouse
6. Proceed down stairs to t’ween deck.

**‘Tween Deck (Holds and Officers quarters)**

|image2|

Stations; 7. Main hold 8. Main hold 9. Awards 10.Audio visual display
11.View into lower hold and water tank.

12.Berths 13.Toilets, “galley” and engine room access. 14.Bosun’s
locker. 15.Officers cabins 16. Saloon 17.Captains cabin

Stairs up to the quarter deck.

Quarter Deck and Main Deck (Follow arrows on first map)
=======================================================

Stations; 18. Engine controls 19. Helm 20. Compass binnacle 21. Cabinet
work 22. Bell 23. Main deck 24. Fife rail & bilge pump.

#. .. rubric:: 
      :name: section

   .. rubric:: 
      :name: section-1

**JAMES CRAIG FACTS AND FIGURES**

Former Names Clan Macleod

Launched 18th February, 1874 by Bartram Haswell & Co. Sunderland England

History Thomas Dunlop (Scotland) 1874 to 1887 (Clan Macleod)

    Sir Roderick Cameron (Scotland) 1887 to 1900 (Clan Macleod)

    JJ Craig, Auckland 1900 to 1911. Renamed ‘James Craig' 14/12/1905.

    British New Guinea Development Company 1911-1918

    Henry Jones IXL 1918-1925.

    Catamaran Coal Mining Co (Recherché Bay, Tasmania) 1925-1930's.

    Scuttled Recherché Bay early 1930's-1972.

    Re-floated 5 am, 24th October, 1972.

    Towed to Hobart 7 am, 26th May, 1973 by tug “Sirius Cove”.

    Powder Wharf, Hobart (sank once) 1973-1981.

    Towed into Sydney Harbour, January 1981

Official Number 68086

Signal Letters VJMR

Propulsion *Original* 3-masted Barque rig

*Restored* 3-masted Barque rig plus 2 x 400hp MTU diesel marine engines
and ZF Marine model IRM 350 gearboxes with reduction ratio 6:1

Tonnage Approx 1.500 tonnes loaded displacement – registered tonnage 646
tonnes.

Length 54.7 metres

Length Overall 70 metres from flying jib boom to mizzen boom

Beam 9.5 metres

Draught 3.7 metres

Depth of Hold 5.5 metres

Masthead Height 33.0 metres above deck. 35.0 metres above waterline
(higher than the deck of the Anzac Bridge @ 27 metres)

Fore lower mast (iron*)* 19.4 metres stepped on keel

Main lower mast (iron) 20 metres stepped on keel

Lower yards (iron) 19.2 metres (weight 1.4 tonnes)

Original Crew Master, his wife, 16 crew including 3 apprentices

Number of frames 92

Number of plates 424

Number of rivets 50,000 (approx.)

Metres of planking 1000 (approx.)

First Landfall in Australia 5th voyage\ **,** Brisbane, 1879

Trans Tasman run 35 round voyages

Typical Cargo Coal, kerosene, general cargo, timber, wool

Length of standing rigging 5000 metres

Total number of sail 21

Total sail area 1100 square metres when fully rigged

Cape Horn Roundings 23

Original Cost Eleven Thousand, Three hundred and Seventy Five Pounds

Funds raised/spent to date A total of AU$6,000,000 since 1973 in dollars
of the day, including an estimated AU$800,000 worth of gifts

in kind. Plus countless hours of voluntary assistance

.. |image0| image:: ../../../sphinx/jc-handbook/source/images/meet_fleet/media/image1.png
   :width: 6.24653in
   :height: 1.40347in
.. |image1| image:: ../../../sphinx/jc-handbook/source/images/meet_fleet/media/image2.png
   :width: 6.33681in
   :height: 1.51458in
.. |image2| image:: ../../../sphinx/jc-handbook/source/images/meet_fleet/media/image3.png
   :width: 6.25139in
   :height: 1.54097in
