***********************
Ship's Standing Parties
***********************


Fire Party
==========

**Primary role.**

The Fire Party is made up of a leader and 5 crew. Duties of each party
member are shown on the relevant crew cards.

An officer always has control of the party and its actions.

Refer to Module 10 for detail.

Members of the party make regular patrol of the ship to monitor and look
for potential hazards.

At the beginning of each voyage fire party is briefed by the leader to
ensure each member is aware of their role.

Members of this party DO NOT CLIMB.

**Second role** of fire party is to lead the Ship Security Patrols.

The patrols, made up of 2 crew, carries out an inspection of all areas
of the ship once an hour while the ship is underway.

Duties;

- Check the Patrol Log in the chartroom for notes made by the previous
patrol.

- Carry a torch and radio. The radio is so that any problems or
potentially dangerous situations can be advise immediately to the OOW.

- When inspecting any confined spaces, such as the lower hold, consider
the condition before entry. One member with the radio stays at the
entrance as sentry, the other proceeds with the inspection. If there is
a problem the crew at the entrance is to advise OOW immediately and NOT
enter the space until assistance arrives.

- On completion of the patrol, record the entry in the Log and advise
the OOW.



Shore/berthing Party
====================

Berthing party is responsible for handling the ship’s lines on shore for
departure and on arrival.

Party is made up of a leader plus 3 crew.

While performing their duties all members of the party are to wear self
inflating life jackets.

Refer to Module 8 & 9 for details.

Duties include unlocking berthing lines on wharf, inverting gangway
wheels, ensure power cable has been cleared and clearing any members of
the public that may be at risk from heaving lines etc.

They also clear, stow and install the gangway.

Party is ferried to and from the ship by attending tug.



Sea Boat
========

The sea boat is manned by a crew of 2, Coxswain and crew.

Routine and Emergency launch of the sea boat is carried out by a team of
8 under the leadership of a watch leader. Overall control is in the
hands of an officer.

Refer to Module 8 for details of launch and recovery procedure.

Refer to Module 12 for details of Small Boat Handling.

Members of this team DO NOT CLIMB.




Stretcher Party
===============

The party is made up of the 4 members of the Shore/Berthing Party.

To assist the Doctor and stewards during an emergency, there may be a
call for stretcher party.

Shore/Berthing party leader is to check all the equipment prior to
departure and brief his crew.

**LIFE RAFT PREPARATION**

Each raft party is made up of a leader and 3 crew.

Leader checks the raft and rig. Report any damage or irregularity.

If necessary, in emergency situation, rig life raft for launch.

**FIRST AID**

This position is not listed on the crew cards.

A Doctor is usually carried and handles First Aid situations, with, in
need the assistance of the stretcher party.

All crew are required to have current Senior First Aid certification and
should be familiar with the location of all first aid kits on board.

Crew members should be able to render first aid assistance to fellow
crew or passengers in need.


Damage Control
==============

This party is made up of members of the Fire Party.

Should the ship suffer damage or gear failure, this party will initially
assemble to secure the situation.

Location of tools etc. and materials are to be noted in case they are
needed.

Spill
=====

This party is made up of members of the Fire Party.

This party will assemble and deploy spill control equipment to contain
any form of spill.

Refer to Module 16 - Spill.


Recovery From Aloft
===================


This is a special party made up of Topmen, who, in need with the aid of
special gear, render assistance to crew in difficulty aloft.

Refer to Module 18 – Recovery from aloft.

