***********************
Ship's Standing Parties
***********************


Fire Party
==========

**Primary role.**

The Fire Party is made up of a leader and 5 crew. Duties of each party
member are shown on the relevant crew cards.

An officer always has control of the party and its actions.

Refer to Module 10 for detail.

Members of the party make regular patrol of the ship to monitor and look
for potential hazards.

At the beginning of each voyage fire party is briefed by the leader to
ensure each member is aware of their role.

Members of this party DO NOT CLIMB.

**Second role** of fire party is to lead the Ship Security Patrols.

The patrols, made up of 2 crew, carries out an inspection of all areas
of the ship once an hour while the ship is underway.

Duties;

- Check the Patrol Log in the chartroom for notes made by the previous
patrol.

- Carry a torch and radio. The radio is so that any problems or
potentially dangerous situations can be advise immediately to the OOW.

- When inspecting any confined spaces, such as the lower hold, consider
the condition before entry. One member with the radio stays at the
entrance as sentry, the other proceeds with the inspection. If there is
a problem the crew at the entrance is to advise OOW immediately and NOT
enter the space until assistance arrives.

- On completion of the patrol, record the entry in the Log and advise
the OOW.





The Fire Party is made up of a Leader and 4 crew, under the direction of
an Officer.

Duties for each party member are shown on the member’s crew card.

Assembly point is the entrance to the crew deck house. Equipment is in
bags under the bottom starboard bunk near the door.

Fire Part radio is kept in the deckhouse. It is to be carried by the
patrol party when doing their rounds. This radio also is the only radio
which has a channel to the dockside security for guides and weekend
maintenance.

In addition to being on stand by, each hour the Leader of the party is
to organise a patrol of all decks of the ship.

The patrol will look out for;

- fire hazards.

- potential flood situations.

- anything that may affect the security of the ship or passengers /crew.

- check refrigeration is on.

- report any anomalies to the Officer of the Watch.

- record the patrol in the log.

Members of the fire party DO NOT CLIMB.

**GUIDE FOR FIRE PARTY LEADER**

- Establish fire party meeting point.

- Brief fire party and check that they know their respective roles.

- Check all equipment;

Protective clothing.

Torch

Hose reels

Fire extinguishers

Fire buckets

Radio

- Walk the ship each hour, main deck, ‘tween deck, hold and all closed
compartments i.e. engine room, etc. Start patrol at chart room by
checking the log for possible hazards etc noted by previous patrol.

- Fire party/patrol radio lives in the deckhouse. Patrol collects the
radio at commencement of patrol and returns it to the deckhouse after
completing patrol. This enables the patrol to immediately report any
problems they find to the Officer of the Watch.

- Look out for potential hazards and fix/report.

- Fire extinguishers and hose reels are not obstructed.

- Fire station clear.

- When in the hold - check for flooding

- check ballast blocks for movement

- Fire doors and escape hatches are not obstructed.

- “Exit” lights are lit and not obscured.

- Note completion of the patrol in the log in the chart room.

- Report to officer of the watch when patrol has been completed.

- Return Radio to its holder in the deck house.



Shore/berthing Party
====================

Berthing party is responsible for handling the ship’s lines on shore for
departure and on arrival.

Party is made up of a leader plus 3 crew.

While performing their duties all members of the party are to wear self
inflating life jackets.

Refer to Module 8 & 9 for details.

Duties include unlocking berthing lines on wharf, inverting gangway
wheels, ensure power cable has been cleared and clearing any members of
the public that may be at risk from heaving lines etc.

They also clear, stow and install the gangway.

Party is ferried to and from the ship by attending tug.



Sea Boat
========

The sea boat is manned by a crew of 2, Coxswain and crew.

Routine and Emergency launch of the sea boat is carried out by a team of
8 under the leadership of a watch leader. Overall control is in the
hands of an officer.

Refer to Module 8 for details of launch and recovery procedure.

Refer to Module 12 for details of Small Boat Handling.

Members of this team DO NOT CLIMB.




Stretcher Party
===============

The party is made up of the 4 members of the Shore/Berthing Party.

To assist the Doctor and stewards during an emergency, there may be a
call for stretcher party.

Shore/Berthing party leader is to check all the equipment prior to
departure and brief his crew.

**LIFE RAFT PREPARATION**

Each raft party is made up of a leader and 3 crew.

Leader checks the raft and rig. Report any damage or irregularity.

If necessary, in emergency situation, rig life raft for launch.

**FIRST AID**

This position is not listed on the crew cards.

A Doctor is usually carried and handles First Aid situations, with, in
need the assistance of the stretcher party.

All crew are required to have current Senior First Aid certification and
should be familiar with the location of all first aid kits on board.

Crew members should be able to render first aid assistance to fellow
crew or passengers in need.


Damage Control
==============

This party is made up of members of the Fire Party.

Should the ship suffer damage or gear failure, this party will initially
assemble to secure the situation.

Location of tools etc. and materials are to be noted in case they are
needed.

Spill
=====

This party is made up of members of the Fire Party.

This party will assemble and deploy spill control equipment to contain
any form of spill.

Refer to Module 16 - Spill.


Recovery From Aloft
===================


This is a special party made up of Topmen, who, in need with the aid of
special gear, render assistance to crew in difficulty aloft.

Refer to Module 18 – Recovery from aloft.

