******************
Special Sea Duties
******************

**Aim:**

Introduce and outline the special sea duty posts manned by crew while
the ship is underway.

New crew are expected to further their skills while serving at these
posts, supported by Officers, Watchleaders and other crew.

**Overview:**

The safety of the ship, and all who she carries, relies on seamanship of
crew and the technical apparatus carried (radar, etc.). A very important
component of ship safety is made up of the various special sea duties
carried out by the crew.

Crew cards, handed to each of the crew by the watchleader, will list
special duty/duties to be performed, time and duration. It is a crew
responsibility to be at the required position on time or when called.

Prior to change of watch, individual crew should find their watch leader
and report that they are going onto a special sea duty post. Also report
when returning from special sea duty post.

While on duty, focus and concentration must be maintained, to the
exclusion of chatting to fellow crew or passengers. Conversation should
be limited to that relevant to their role.

If not fully familiar with a special duty, ask.

**Contents:**

-  Forward lookout

-  Captain’s runner

-  Helmsman

-  Lazy helmsman

-  Stern lookout (Includes Man overboard lookout)

-  Fire party

-  Berthing party

-  Sea boat

-  Stretcher party

-  Life raft preparation

-  First Aid

-  Damage control

-  Spill

-  Recover from aloft/rescue

**Assessment:**

Assessment by Officer of the watch or Watchleader will be carried while
the various duties are being performed. When competency is displayed
they will sign the appropriate entries in the crew member’s ‘Diary of
Service and Experience Log’ book.

**Outcomes:**

All crew to become fully competent at all special duties.

Forward Lookout
===============

The ship’s forward eyes.

This position is manned at all times while the ship is underway. Crew
man this position in rotation. Details are shown on relevant crew cards
with time and period of duty.

One member of the crew is assigned to take over this position for and
during **ALL EMERGENCY** situations. This also includes drill exercises.

At night two crew man this position.

Lookout post is the anchor deck. This is a very exposed area so crew
should wear suitable clothing and wear a harness which is attached to
the ship at all times.

Remember;

- A lookout is to be maintained in **All Directions**, not just forward.

- Avoid “blind spots” created by jibboom, net, sails and rigging by
moving about.

- A harness is to be worn at **all** times and clipped to the ship.

- Be aware of jib and fore topmast staysail bullet blocks.

- Prior to first trick (watch) of the voyage, lookout is to obtain a
radio from the chart room and establish which channel to use. Carry out
a radio check.

- Lookout is to radio the quarterdeck sighting of other vessels,
navigation markers or buoys, breaking water, fishing buoys, any lights
seen at night (e.g. navigation buoys, vessels, lighthouses) and anything
unusual ahead of or approaching the ship’s course from any direction.
Never assume the quarter deck may have seen what is observed.

- In harbour, be aware that you may be obstructing the forward view of
the Quartermaster, who could be using a landmark ahead to guild the
ship.

- During daylight hours use the ship’s forward bell to answer the bell
strike on the quarter deck, vis each half hour.

Reports are given as:

**D**\ irection - given in “Points” off the port or starboard bow
(directly forward to abeam equals 8 points). Refer Module 3, page 8 for
“ hand”

method of estimating points.

**D**\ istance - using general terms such as “very close” (within 100m),
“close”

(within 1km), “far” (several kilometres), “very far” (on the

horizon).

**D**\ escription - nice and brief, e.g. “a large ship”, “a yacht”, “a
small fishing

boat”, “a commercial fishing boat”, “a yellow buoy”.

**D**\ estination - “it’s standing still”, “it’s heading towards us”,
“it’s moving

    away from us”.

**D**\ eviation - any change in target’s speed or heading.

*Example of typical report*:

*Call* – “Quarterdeck this is Focs’l.”

*Reply* – “Focs’l this is quarterdeck.”

*Report* – “Four points off our starboard bow and close, a fishing boat
stationary

*Reply* – “Quarterdeck romeo.”

When being relieved, lookout is to brief new lookout on what objects are
currently visible and which have/have not been reported aft.

New lookout should then carry out a radio check with quarter deck- e.g.

*Call* – “Quarterdeck this is Focs’l radio check.”

*Reply* – “Focs'l this is quarterdeck - loud and clear.” or “breaking

    up.” or as the case may be.


Captain's Runner
================

This position is manned at all times while the ship is underway.

One member of the crew is assigned to take over this position for and
during **ALL EMERGENCY** situations. This also includes drill exercises.

Relief is provided by other crew, details are shown on relevant crew
cards together with time period of duty.

Prior to first trick of the voyage, the runner obtains a hand held UHF
radio from the chart room and establishes which channel is to be used.

Runner’s post is with the "officer of the watch" (OOW) who will be on
the quarterdeck. The officer of the watch can be established by checking
with any officers on the quarterdeck. The runner should introduce him or
herself to the OOW.

The runner relays any messages from the forward lookout to the OOW.
Often this is made easier by staying close with radio turned up
reasonably loud.

The runner must stay with the OOW at all times so as to be available for
any errands forward or below.

Ship’s bell is sounded by the Captain’s runner and repeated by forward
lookout. Refer to Module 3 for the bell system for marking time.

When being relieved, the new runner should report to the existing
runner, take over the radio and introduce themselves to the OOW.

New runner should then carry out a radio check with the focs’l; e.g.

    *Call* – “Focs’l this is Quarterdeck. Can you give me a radio
    check.”

    *Reply* - "Quarterdeck this is Focs’l. Loud and clear.” or “breaking
    up.” or as the case may be.



Helmsman
========

(**Or Quartermaster )**

A crew member is assigned to be the Helmsman (Quartermaster, Mud-pilot)
for a voyage.

Quartermaster (mud pilot) takes the wheel when leaving and returning to
port and **ALL EMERGENCY** situations. This also includes drill
exercises.

Relief is provided by other crew, details are shown on relevant crew
cards together with time and period of duty. Refer later to the formal
handover procedure.

Helmsman’s post is at weather side of wheel, un-harnessed. Helmsman is
responsible for steering the ship to a compass course, full and bye,
visible landmark heading (usually in harbour) or turns of the wheel, as
directed by the OOW.

Helmsman is to understand how the ship's bow relates to the wheel, which
is instinctive, so as to steer a straight course or head to an object
(i.e. bring her bow to port, turn the top of the wheel to port).

Helmsman is to understand how the ship's bow relates to the compass
lubber line, so as to keep the ship on a compass course (i.e. if lubber
line drifts to left of correct compass course, it and the bow can be
bought back to the right by turning the top of the wheel to starboard).
Remember the compass card is stationary and the ship movers around it.

Helmsman is to immediately and loudly repeat any order given by the OOW
so that the OOW knows the helmsman has heard him correctly. When the
order has been completed (executed) again report as in the following
example.

    *00W* *order* – “Three turns to port.”

    *Helmsman immediately repeats order* – “Three turns to port, Sir.”

    *When turns completed, report* – “ Three turns to port on Sir."

    Or,

    *OOW* *order* – “Come to port and steer two seven zero.”

    *Helmsman* - “Steer two seven zero, Sir.”

    *When complete, and the ship is steady on the new heading report* -
    *“Ship's head steady two seven zero Sir.”*

    Note; Numbers such as 270 are spoken as “two, seven, zero” **NOT**
    as “two hundred and seventy”.

Prior to first trick of a voyage, Quartermaster for the voyage;

- removes locking chains and stows

- inspects steering gear for obvious faults

- oils the thread, bearings and sliding nuts

- checks nut pins are in place

- turn the wheel through full 16 turns, both ways

- check rudder moves with wheel

- checks helm indicator for damage

- check compass.

PROCEDURE FOR RELIEVING AT THE WHEEL

The process of change of helmsman is an important and formal part of the
ship's routine, which should be meticulously learnt and performed.

The Helmsman is to report at least five minutes before the nominated
time of his taking over the wheel so that he can adjust to the light,
the weather conditions and sea state, the course steered and the
steering conditions.

He should first approach the OOW., introduce himself and seek permission
to take over the wheel in the following terms:

“Officer of the Watch Sir - this is …………. - permission to take the
wheel?”

The Officer of the Watch, taking into account such factors as,

-  known ability of crew member

-  the possibility of an impending alteration of course

-  the proximity of other ships and the time required for new helmsman
   to settle into the steering role, will either approve the request by
   saying,

    “Yes please.”

Or, if a delay is considered, he will say –

“Please stand by.”

On receiving approval to take over the wheel the relieving Helmsman will
introduce himself to the current helmsman, saying –

“……………………… to relieve the wheel.”

The current Helmsman will then inform the relieving Helmsman of the
course to be steered, whether or not the ship is carrying any wheel and
how ship is handling. For example:

    a) “Course zero four five, carrying one turn of port wheel.”

    b) "Steering full and by on the main upper topsail luff, carrying
    about two turns of starboard wheel.”

The relief Helmsman will repeat this report and the current Helmsman is
responsible for ensuring that relief Helmsman has heard and understood
the report.

The current Helmsman will then steady the ship on her course and hand
over to the relieving Helmsman saying.

“Have YOU got the wheel?”

The relieving Helmsman should then reply-

“Yes I have the wheel.”

The relieved Helmsman should then report to the OOW saying –

“………………… – relieved at the wheel by …………….., course zero four five,
carrying one turn of port wheel, Sir.”

The OOW will acknowledge this report by saying –

“Thank you …………………. - carry on.”

The observance of the formality of the procedure is more important in
James

Craig than in a normal merchant ship where the names and professional
capabilities of the crew are well known to the master and officers of
the watch.




Lazy Helmsman
=============

This post is not regularly filled unless weather or other factors are
making steering difficult.

Lazy helmsman's post is at helm, opposite the helmsman. He/she is there
to assist when requested by helmsman and in case of emergency. Common
requests may include confirming orders from OOW providing compass
headings or tiller indicator readings, assisting in strong blows.

In the case of man overboard, lazy helm immediately throws the nearest
life ring and other safety gear if it has not already been deployed. He
then maintains eye contact with man overboard and points to his
direction.

When relieved there is no need to report to O.O.W.

Stern Lookout
=============

The ship’s eyes aft.

Also refer to Module 8.


Duties - Man position adjacent to Dan Buoy on the port side of the
quarter deck.

-  Wear a safety harness.
-  Inspect Dan Buoy, Life Ring and Marker Buoy to ensure they are not
   damaged or tangled, and are connected together, and free to launch
   quickly.
-  Report any problems to the Watch Officer or Quarter Deck Watchleader.
-  Carry out duties listed below.
-  Maintain a lookout in **ALL** directions vis. Fore, Aft, Port,
   Starboard as well as monitoring activity on board. Report to the
   Officer of the Watch any unusual observations.


This position is manned at all times while the ship is underway.

One member of the crew is assigned to take over this position for **ALL
EMERGENCY** situations. This also includes drill exercises.

Relief is provided by other crew, details are shown on relevant crew
cards together with time and period of duty.

Prior to first trick of the voyage, the equipment on the port side (Dan
buoy, life ring, smoke buoy and connecting lanyards) is to be checked.
Also check the equipment on the starboard side.

Man overboard lookout post is aft on the quarterdeck. Lookout wears a
safety harness and should stand next to the safety equipment (Dan Buoy,
life ring and smoke buoy).

When taking over the position, check that all gear is present and clear
for use.

Like the Forward Lookout, the MOB Lookout is the ship’s eye, at the
stern. Lookout is to scan in **ALL DIRECTIONS** overboard as well as
monitor ship board activities on deck and aloft. Report to the OOW any
unusual situations or potentially dangerous activities observed.

In the case of a man overboard situation occurring, the lookout
immediately launches the safety equipment, establishes eye contact with
the **person** in the water and points in his direction. When relieved,
lookout smartly climbs 2/3 to 3/4 of the way up the mizzen weather
shrouds. Lookout then re-establishes eye contact with the man overboard
and points in his direction. He can call out directions to crew on deck,
but is not to take his eyes off the man in the water.

Lookout maintains this role through the entire recovery procedure -
while sea boat is launched, while man overboard is recovered and while
rescue boat is returning. He stands easy and comes down to deck **only**
when rescue boat is back and secure in its cradle.

When being relieved, there is no need to report to OOW.
